feat:  multiple environments (#581)
appsmithorg/appsmith-docs: website/docs/advanced-concepts/multiple-environments.md

# Multiple Environments

When building applications, there is usually a clear distinction between the version of the app that end users see and the version still under development/testing. Most software of reasonable complexity make this distinction clear by having different environments for development/testing and production use. This ensures that end users of the app aren't impacted by changes which are still in development. 

Appsmith provides a way to define multiple environments for datasources. It allows you to switch between different environments while developing your app in edit mode. By switching environments, you are applying the datasource configurations defined in that environment.

:::info
The multiple environments feature is only available on [Business Edition](https://www.appsmith.com/pricing). 
:::

## Environments on Appsmith

> Appsmith provides two environments out of the box - **staging** and **production**. Staging environment configurations should ideally point to datasources which are used for development, QA or user acceptance testing. Production environment configurations should point to datasources which have live data that the end user see on the app.

Reviewer: > that the end user see on the app
@harshilp24 @danciaclara there is a grammatical mistake in this statement. It should be "end user sees on the app"

<VideoEmbed host="youtube" videoId="3hoIWkvL9hA" title="Configure an environment" caption="Configure an environment | MongoDB" />  

* On the Explorer tab, select the **datasource** for which you want to configure multiple environments.
* Click the **EDIT** button on the top-right corner.
* Click **MANAGE ENVIRONMENTS** on the top-right corner.
* Select the environment from the **Configure Environment** dropdown list.
* Set the `Host Address` and `port` fields under the **Endpoints** section for the chosen environment. 
* Under **Datasource Configurations** add the values by selecting the fields you want to configure.
* Once the fields are configured, click **BIND VALUES** button on the bottom right of the page to bind the environment variables. 

You can set different values in the database configuration fields for each environment.

<figure>
  <img src="/img/me-db-1.png" style= {{width:"700px", height:"auto"}} alt="Multiple environments set for PostgreSQL datasource"/>
  <figcaption align = "center"><i>Multiple environments set for a PostgreSQL datasource</i></figcaption>
</figure>

## Switch environments

> In the **edit mode**, you can toggle between staging and production environments on the bottom right corner of the screen, enabling you to run queries in the environment of your choice. 

Reviewer: @danciaclara @harshilp24 Switching environments is also possible in view mode, if the user has permission. I think we should mention that as well.

# Multiple Environments

> Environments are container entities within a workspace that let you create different updates to different versions of your content types while still keeping them all in isolation. This process is often utilized when developing, identifying errors, or introducing new features without any concerns about how it might influence the current production.

Reviewer 2: This intro looks a little out of context. Can we keep the one shared by the engineering team in the first draft for now.

>  While building apps, there is usually a clear distinction between the version of the app that end users see versus the version that is still under development or testing. Most pieces of software of reasonable complexity make this distinction clear by having different “environments” for development, testing and production use. This ensures that end users of the app are not impacted by changes which are still in development.

Reviewer 3: updated

:::info
Multiple Environments are only available on [Business Edition](https://www.appsmith.com/pricing). 
:::

> Software developers can run numerous tests in these environments to filter out bugs and raise the application's overall quality. Different testing settings can be used to examine different aspects of a software application, including its performance, user interface, security, and more.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Developers can run numerous tests in these environments to filter out bugs and raise the application's overall quality before deploying it to production. 
```
merge this line to the bottom of the intro para

## Environments on Appsmith

> There are two different environments that are available on Appsmith:

Reviewer 2: Before mentioning, add the line shared in the first draft

> Appsmith provides a way for you to define different environments for datasources. It allows you to switch between different environments as you develop your application in the Edit mode. By switching environments, you can apply the datasource configurations defined in that particular environment.

Reviewer 3: done

> There are two different environments that are available on Appsmith:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Appsmith provides two environments - Staging and Production.
```

### Staging environment

> Before launching an application, staging environments are created to evaluate builds, codes, and updates in an environment which is similar to a production environment. This is the area that developers take advantage of to inspect new aspects, debug, and explore their applications.

Reviewer 2: let's stick to the context of datasources in Appsmith. and not discuss evaluating builds and codes. Let's also use the line shared in the first draft

> :::info

Reviewer 2: no need of a callout here. just keep as normal text

Reviewer 3: removed callout

It's also referred to as the Testing or QA environment
:::

> * The configuration values for a datasource are usually the same for staging and production. If you want to change them, you can go to the ```manage environments``` page and make the necessary adjustments.

Reviewer 2: I feel we should omit this entire bullet section

Reviewer 3: removed

* Integration testing frequently takes place in a staging environment.
* Each team member has a particular level of access to this collaborative workspace.

### Production environment

> Once the latest software, services, or upgrades are ready for public use, they're pushed live to the users in a production environment. This is the final stage of production, where the end user can view, use, and interact with the new product.

Reviewer 2: again lets stick to Appsmith context and use info from the first draft and write around that point fo this entire section.

Reviewer 3: done, also removed the bullet points

* When deployed, the application always uses the production environment. However, if the user has requisite permissions, they can “apply” the staging environment configuration in view mode.
* Similar to a staging environment, each team member has a designated level of access to this environment.

This type of infrastructure makes it possible for teams to completely control the quality of their product releases. It encourages innovation and improvement, while ensuring efficient monitoring of the creation, testing, and deployment of a new product or updates. In addition, it guarantees the end user receives the best experience possible.

> ## How to configure an environment

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Configure an environment
```

With Appsmith, it's easy to set up staging and production environments. By default, all the configuration values for a datasource are shared between staging and production. If you have to configure different parameters for staging and production, follow the steps mentioned below:

> ### Configure environment for databases

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Databases
```

![](/img/me-db-3.png)
![](/img/me-db-2.png)
//remove-above-images-and-add-videos

* On the Explorer tab, click the **+** sign next to datasources.
* Select a **Database**.
* Add the necessary information, such as host name, access key, username, and password, depending on the database.
* Click **Manage Environments** on the top-right corner.
* Set the parameters for the production and staging environments. 

You can set different values for each environment. For instance, if you have a Postgresql database with different configuration, you can select a particular environment and set the values.

//remove-below-images-and-add-videos
![](/img/me-db-1.png)

Once parameters are configured, **bind** the values. 

> ### Configure environment for APIs

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### APIs
```

//add video

//don't have figma files for APIs, so keeping the steps same

* On the Explorer tab, click the **+** sign next to datasources.
* Select a **API**.
* Add the necessary information, such as API key, headers, and body, depending on the datasource.
* Click **Manage Environments** on the top-right corner.
* Set the parameters for the production and staging environments. 

//add example and video for rest API

Once parameters are configured, **bind** the values. 

//info, add-google-sheet-example, as the google sheet is having different UI

//add example video for google sheets

## Switch environments

> You can decide which environment to use when you are editing the app. In edit mode, you can switch between staging and production environments by using the **toggle** located on the **bottom right corner of the screen**. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can decide which environment to use when you are editing the app. In edit mode, you can switch between staging and production environments by using the **toggle** located on the bottom right corner of the screen. 
```

:::note
Already-deployed version of the app won't be impacted by this. However, any modifications you make may have an impact on other editors who are still working on the app.
:::
![](/img/switch-environments.png)
//Will update the image when DP is ready

> 

Reviewer 2: Please add this point from the first draft

> The deployed version of the app always uses the production environment. However, if the user has requisite permissions, they can apply the Staging environment configuration in view mode.

Reviewer 3: it is already there is the Production environment section
